KEP: Topology Spreading (#13787)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/13746-topology-spreading/README.md

Kubernetes Pod Topology Spread Constraints operate at the pod level and are
evaluated by kube-scheduler independently of Kueue. They can be used alongside
this feature for intra-workload pod distribution. Kueue Topology Spreading
operates at the workload level, across separate Kueue `Workload` objects, and is
evaluated during the Kueue admission cycle.

#### Spreading is cross-workload, not intra-workload

Each Kueue `Workload` object represents one logical unit (e.g., one LWS
leader+workers group, one Deployment replica managed by Kueue). Spreading
distributes these units across domains. Pod-level distribution within a single
workload is outside the scope of this KEP.

#### Spreading only applies to topology-enabled Resource Flavors

Topology Spreading is active for a workload only when **both** of the following
conditions hold:

1. The workload carries the `kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading`
   annotation with a valid configuration. Workloads without this annotation are
   unaffected — the feature is entirely opt-in.
2. The selected `ResourceFlavor` has a `Topology` field that declares the
   topology levels used as spreading keys. Flavors without a `Topology` field do

>    not participate in domain-based scheduling.

Author: Done

beyond what is strictly necessary for HA goals.

#### Interaction with preemption

A high-priority workload with `type: Required` rules can trigger preemptions to
achieve the required spreading. Kueue's standard priority-based preemption
applies, with the additional constraint that freed capacity must land in a
non-banned domain.

A high-priority workload with `type: Preferred` rules does not trigger
preemptions to improve spreading. The scheduler minimizes skew across available
domains through scoring, but some preemptions may still occur to find capacity
anywhere in the cluster.

#### Caching

Counting matching workloads is O(n) in the number of admitted workloads per
namespace. To avoid repeating this scan on every scheduling cycle, the scheduler
maintains a cached structure:

```
cache[(namespace, selector-key, topology-key)] → map[domainID]int
```

The cache is invalidated (and re-computed lazily) whenever:

- A workload matching the selector is admitted.
- A workload matching the selector has its admission revoked (eviction or
  preemption).

The `selector-key` is the normalized string representation of the parsed label

> selector, to allow sharing across workloads with identical selectors.

Author: This finding is not applicable to the current design. TopologySpreadingPolicy has no labelSelector field — group membership is determined solely by the  kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading-policy annotation on the Workload's PodSet template (spec.podSets[*].template.metadata.annotations). That annotation is part of the immutable pod template and does not change after the Workload is created. Workloads cannot enter or leave a spreading group via label changes. The Alternatives section ("workloadLabelSelector as an explicit group identifier") documents why a selector-based design was rejected.

### Visibility

When a workload cannot be admitted because a `Required` spreading rule cannot be
satisfied (all eligible domains are banned), the following surfaces are updated:

- **Workload condition**: a `QuotaReserved: False` or `Admitted: False` condition
  with `reason: TopologySpreadConstraintNotMet` and a message describing which
  rule and domains are blocked.
- **Logs**: a structured log entry at `V(3)` naming the workload, the violated

>   rule key, and the domain counts.

Author: Done

        - [Alpha](#alpha)
        - [Beta](#beta)
        - [Stable](#stable)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Use maxSkew instead of max-domain-percentage](#use-maxskew-instead-of-max-domain-percentage)
    - [First-class API field instead of annotation](#first-class-api-field-instead-of-annotation)
    - [Enforce spreading via kube-scheduler Pod Topology Spread Constraints](#enforce-spreading-via-kube-scheduler-pod-topology-spread-constraints)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

Topology Spreading is a Kueue feature that distributes admitted workloads across
topology domains (e.g., availability zones, racks, superblocks) to improve service
availability. It complements Topology Aware Scheduling (KEP-2724), which optimizes
for dense co-location of pods within a workload for low-latency communication.
While dense co-location is desirable for batch ML training, user-facing inference
services benefit from spreading replicas across failure domains so that a localized
infrastructure outage does not take down the entire service.

The feature introduces a new annotation,

> `[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading`, on Kueue Workloads. The annotation

Author: Done

   topology levels used as spreading keys. Flavors without a `Topology` field do
   not participate in domain-based scheduling.

If either condition is not met, all spreading rules are ignored for that
workload/flavor combination. Specifically: if a workload is matched to a
ResourceFlavor that does not declare the topology key referenced in a `Required`
rule, that flavor is skipped during flavor selection. For `Preferred` rules, a
non-topology flavor (or a topology flavor that does not declare the spreading key)
remains eligible for selection; the spreading preference is simply not applied for
that rule.

#### Spreading is enforced only at scheduling time

Once a workload is admitted, Kueue does not re-evaluate spreading constraints.
If the domain balance changes after admission (e.g., some workloads finish), the
remaining workloads are not migrated. This matches the Kubernetes behavior where
`topologySpreadConstraints` are evaluated at scheduling time only.

#### Cold-start behavior

The `max-domain-percentage` formula is designed to allow cold-start:

```
domain_count < max_domain_percentage * total_count + 1

> ```

Author: Done

  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
    - [Alpha](#alpha)
    - [Beta](#beta)
    - [Stable](#stable)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Use maxSkew instead of max-domain-percentage](#use-maxskew-instead-of-max-domain-percentage)
  - [First-class API field instead of annotation](#first-class-api-field-instead-of-annotation)
  - [Enforce spreading via kube-scheduler Pod Topology Spread Constraints](#enforce-spreading-via-kube-scheduler-pod-topology-spread-constraints)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

Topology Spreading is a Kueue feature that distributes admitted workloads across
topology domains (e.g., availability zones, racks, superblocks) to improve service
availability. It complements Topology Aware Scheduling (KEP-2724), which optimizes
for dense co-location of pods within a workload for low-latency communication.
While dense co-location is desirable for batch ML training, user-facing inference
services benefit from spreading replicas across failure domains so that a localized
infrastructure outage does not take down the entire service.

The feature introduces a new annotation,

> `[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading`, on Kueue Workloads. The annotation

Reviewer: By [alpha] here you mean that during alpha we will require `alpha` prefix or that this is optionally prefixed with alpha?

Do we really need this complication? In general this will require/expect some changes from the user when the feature transitions to beta.

 IMO it should be enough to clearly document this as an alpha feature - and have alpha FG for it.

Author: Yeah, agree with you. No need this complications. Removed it.

### Non-Goals

- Intra-workload pod spreading (use Kubernetes Pod Topology Spread Constraints
  for that).
- Spreading across non-topology ResourceFlavors.
- Automatic cross-namespace spreading.
- More than two topology levels in the alpha milestone.
- Continuous rebalancing of already-admitted workloads.
- Changes to the core Kubernetes scheduler.

## Proposal

The feature introduces a new per-workload annotation that carries spreading
configuration as a JSON object. At admission time, the Kueue scheduler reads the
annotation, counts how many already-admitted workloads (from the same namespace,
matching the label selector) reside in each topology domain, and then decides
whether the candidate domain is admissible (`Required`) or how heavily to penalize
it (`Preferred`).

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Zone-level HA for inference services

A platform team runs an inference service consisting of many single-replica
Kueue workloads managed through a Deployment. Each workload is a separate GPU pod.
They want to ensure that no more than 45% of the inference pods end up in any
single availability zone. They annotate the workload template:

```yaml

> "[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading": |

Reviewer 2: Based on https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/13150, the goal is to eventually phase out annotations for Kueue for topology. 
I'd really like to see a path forward with WAS and make sure we can cover this in-tree scheduler rather than keep expanding the Kueue's tas algorithm without consulting WAS on this feature request.

I also have major reservations with a complicated API being jammed into a label value. How are you planning on users setting the right syntax?

cc @44past4 @helayoty @nojnhuh

Reviewer 3: I think the plan is that Kueue can expand its TAS capabilities and APIs. The idea for convergence is not to Kueue TAS = WAS TAS, but rather Kueue TAS plugin in the scheduler library will express the constraints. 

So, I don't think requesting the feature parity is good idea.

of the total matching workloads, holding it pending until another zone has
capacity or the imbalance resolves through other means.

#### Story 2: Mixed training/inference workloads

An ML platform deploys both training jobs (which want dense packing via TAS) and
inference replicas (which need zone spreading). Inference workloads carry the
topology-spreading annotation. Training workloads do not carry the annotation and
are unaffected. The two features coexist in the same cluster and even the same
ClusterQueue.

#### Story 3: Soft spreading with limited capacity

An operator prefers zone spreading but recognizes that capacity constraints may
prevent strict enforcement. They use `"type": "Preferred"`:

```yaml
"[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading": |
  {
    "workload-label-selector": "app=inference-service",
    "rules": [
      {
        "key": "topology.kubernetes.io/zone",
        "max-domain-percentage": "45",
        "type": "Preferred"
      }
    ]
  }
```

The scheduler will admit the workload into any available domain, but will heavily
penalize over-crowded zones so that, all else being equal, workloads land in the

> least-loaded zone.

Reviewer: Can you clarify this fragment?

What do you mean by least loaded and over-crowded here? The number of workloads matching the selector? Or all pods in the cluster?

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

#### Relationship to Kubernetes Pod Topology Spread Constraints

Kubernetes Pod Topology Spread Constraints operate at the pod level and are
evaluated by kube-scheduler independently of Kueue. They can be used alongside
this feature for intra-workload pod distribution. Kueue Topology Spreading

> operates at the workload level, across separate Kueue `Workload` objects, and is

Reviewer: For me the fact that this is a workload level annotation introduces a little bit dissonance. This naturally sounds like a cluster level or namespace level constraint for me.

Otherwise we get into this strange situation that either:
A) one workloads annotations affect other workloads (if we spread other workloads based on the fact that workload with this annotation is already admitted)
B) only some of the workloads matching this selector may be spread - depending on the fact if those had the annotation

Moreover this bring more friction from the user side - instead of just adding this as for example LQ annotation and just using it they have to add this to every workload which creates considerable redundancy. 

Have you considered making this a local-queue or cluster-queue annotation as an alternative? This would allow user to indicate this annotation "just once" when defining the cluster. Obviously this has also some trade-offs - requires admin access changes to use.
Maybe something in between is worth it?

Author: Looking at the spreading concept in core Kubernetes, the primary motivation is availability – ensuring workloads land across failure domains. The goal for Kueue is analogous: spread workloads across topology domains so that a localized outage doesn't take down an entire service. 

In Kubernetes, topology spread constraints live in the PodSpec, which means the configuration is per-pod template – i.e., per distinct pod type. I think we should mirror this design for Kueue workloads.

**On the cross-workload effect (your point A)**

You noted that one workload's annotation affects other workloads' scheduling. This is actually intentional – cross-workload spreading via a label selector is the core mechanism. The scheduler needs to count already-admitted workloads matching the selector in order to make a placement decision for the incoming one. The problem is not the cross-workload effect itself, but rather that users currently have to repeat the same annotation on every workload to participate in that effect. That redundancy concern is valid and is addressed below.                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                            
**Why the workload level has a granularity problem – PodSet groups**

After reviewing the code more carefully, workloads in Kueue can contain multiple PodSet groups, each potentially assigned to a different ResourceFlavor and topology. This means a Workload cannot be treated as an atomic unit for placement purposes – the indivisible unit is the PodSet group. This is a non-obvious constraint that pushes the natural home for spreading configuration down to the PodSet group level, not the Workload level.

**Why LocalQueue / ClusterQueue level is even more restrictive**
                                                                                                                                                            
Moving the annotation to the LocalQueue or ClusterQueue level imposes too broad a scope. A single LocalQueue can serve workloads with different topologies, different ResourceFlavors, and entirely different workload types. To make it work at that level, you'd need a label selector scoped to specific job types — which largely defeats the purpose of centralizing the config there and adds its own complexity.                                      

I also considered placing the annotation on the Topology object itself, but that introduces a similar over-scoping problem.
                                                                                                                                                            
**Preferred approach**

The cleanest solution is to introduce a dedicated TopologySpreadingPolicy CRD carrying the full configuration (workload-label-selector + rules), referenced by name from PodSet groups. This directly addresses your redundancy concern: users define the policy once and reference it from each PodSet group, rather than duplicating the full annotation on every workload. It also mirrors established Kubernetes patterns (PodDisruptionBudget, RuntimeClass) – a separate policy object decoupled from the workload spec – and keeps configuration flexible per workload type without requiring queue-level admin changes for every new use case.

Reviewer: A separate CRD for me makes sense, it will give us deduplication, single responsibility & allows for distinct access management. 
I'm not sure if it needs to be referenced from the workloads - "just if your workload should be spread according to the spreading policy then it is spread" makes more sense to me, maybe with an opt out by annotation it the future.
IMO we can introduce it from the start - as it will be a new CRD we will not introduce any unstable "alpha/beta" changes in the existing ones.

Author: There’s also a question of whether we should opt in or opt out. I think opt-in is preferable because we can configure each PodSet group differently and omit this configuration when it isn’t needed.

cc @reruno for visibility

Author: I updated this KEP with the latest changes: added a separate CRD and moved `kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading-policy` to the PodSet templates.

distributes these units across domains. Pod-level distribution within a single
workload is outside the scope of this KEP.

#### Spreading only applies to topology-enabled Resource Flavors

Topology Spreading is active for a workload only when **both** of the following
conditions hold:

1. The workload carries the `[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading`
   annotation with a valid configuration. Workloads without this annotation are
   unaffected — the feature is entirely opt-in.
2. The selected `ResourceFlavor` has a `Topology` field that declares the
   topology levels used as spreading keys. Flavors without a `Topology` field do
   not participate in domain-based scheduling.

If either condition is not met, all spreading rules are ignored for that
workload/flavor combination. Specifically: if a workload is matched to a
ResourceFlavor that does not declare the topology key referenced in a `Required`
rule, that flavor is skipped during flavor selection. For `Preferred` rules, a
non-topology flavor (or a topology flavor that does not declare the spreading key)
remains eligible for selection; the spreading preference is simply not applied for

> that rule.

Reviewer: Will flavors with matching topology "Preferred"  levels be prioritized for scheduling?

Generally I'm worried that this will not be clear for the users why specific flavor was omitted because of the required annotation.
At the same time if we do not prioritize preferred flavors it is easy to have a configuration that never spreads workloads by mistake - just having wrong flavor as first in the CQ

Author: Spreading is implemented inside findTopologyAssignment, which only runs for topology-enabled ResourceFlavors. Non-TAS flavors never enter this code path, so spreading simply does not apply to them in either mode – they are not explicitly skipped, but the spreading logic is never evaluated for them.

`max-domain-percentage` because the rounding effect of "+1" dominates. This is
intentional: a single replica should always be admissible even when only one
domain has capacity.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Annotation parsing errors

Malformed JSON or invalid field values will cause the workload to be marked with
a `TopologySpreadInvalid` condition and excluded from scheduling. This prevents
silent misconfiguration. The exact validation rules are described in
[Validation and error handling](#validation-and-error-handling).

#### Performance impact of counting workloads per domain

Counting matching workloads across the namespace on every scheduling cycle could
be expensive at high workload counts. The implementation will maintain a cached
map of per-domain counts (keyed by `(namespace, label-selector, domain-key)`)
that is invalidated when a workload matching the selector is admitted or
evicted. See [Caching](#caching).

#### Stale data after preemptions

During preemption, candidate victim workloads are tentatively removed from the
count before the preemption is committed. If the preemption is retracted, the

> count must be restored. The implementation will account for this by tracking

Reviewer: How this tentative removal will work with new admissions? Can this be the case that this will lead to incorrect domain counts as a new workload is assigned to the same domain and  preemption is retracted?
Are we okay with this? Maybe we can avoid this issue?

Author: No risk here. Spreading counts are derived from the scheduler's per-cycle snapshot, not the persistent cache. SimulateWorkloadRemoval temporarily removes victims from the snapshot's cq.Workloads map for the duration of the evaluation within a single scheduling cycle – no other workload can be admitted between the removal and the restore. The persistent cache is only updated when preemption is actually committed, so domain counts always reflect the truly admitted set. A new workload cannot be admitted based on stale counts while a preemption is tentatively retracted.

the configured percentage). This formulation ensures that:

1. **Cold start**: When `total` is 0 or very small, the "+1" term always allows at
   least one domain to accept the workload.
2. **Steady state**: As the number of workloads grows, the constraint converges to
   an even distribution across domains.

The following example illustrates the formula for 3 domains and
`max-domain-percentage = 34`:

| Workload # | Domain A (count → %) | Domain B (count → %) | Domain C (count → %) | Placed in |
|---|---|---|----------------------|---|
| 1 | 0 → 0% ✓ | 0 → 0% | 0 → 0%               | A |
| 2 | 1 → 100% ✗ | 0 → 0% ✓ | 0 → 0%               | B |
| 3 | 1 → 50% ✗ | 1 → 50% ✗ | 0 → 0% ✓             | C |
| 4 | 1 → 33% ✓ | 1 → 33% | 1 → 33%              | A |
| 5 | 2 → 50% ✗ | 1 → 25% ✓ | 1 → 25%              | B |
| 6 | 2 → 40% ✗ | 2 → 40% ✗ | 1 → 20% ✓            | C |

#### Annotation propagation from Job to Workload

Users will typically annotate their Job (or other supported object such as a
LeaderWorkerSet or Deployment) rather than the controller-created `Workload` object.
Kueue propagates selected annotations from the Job to the Workload during workload

> construction in `NewWorkload` (`pkg/controller/jobframework/utils.go`).

Reviewer: I lack direct answer here. So will this annotation be propagated by default or not? Does user have to configure anything to propagate it?

Author: Updated

#### Validation and error handling

The following validation is performed when a workload carrying the annotation is
first seen by the Kueue controller:

1. The annotation value must be valid JSON.

> 2. `workload-label-selector` must be a syntactically valid Kubernetes label

Reviewer: Does it have to match the current workload? Or are we allowing for topology spreading annotation that are just related to other workloads?

Author: The spreading group is defined by the policy name: only admitted workloads whose PodSet template carries ґkueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading-policyґ referencing this policy are counted – workloads without that annotation are not included regardless of their labels. The candidate workload being evaluated is not yet admitted, so it is not counted either; the formula checks whether placing it would push the domain over the cap. Clarified this in the KEP.

   selector string.
3. `rules` must be a non-empty array of at most 2 entries (the alpha-milestone level limit; see [Goals](#goals)).

> 4. Each rule must contain `key` (non-empty string) and `max-domain-percentage`

Reviewer: Are we going to validate that those keys match the topology levels? Or user will know only after the workload admission fails, or possibly never in case of "preferred" type?

Author: Rule key values are not validated at policy creation time – validation happens at scheduling time. If the key doesn't match any topology level in the evaluated ResourceFlavor, the rule is ignored and the workload is admitted normally (regardless of Required or Preferred). A TopologySpreadKeyNotFound workload condition is set to surface the misconfiguration to operators. The Required/Preferred distinction only applies when the key IS found in the flavor. Updated the Visibility section accordingly.

   (parseable integer, 1–99 inclusive).

> 5. `type`, if present, must be `"Required"` or `"Preferred"`.

Author: Done

If any validation fails, the workload is marked with the condition:

```yaml
type: TopologySpreadInvalid
status: "True"
reason: InvalidConfiguration
message: "<human-readable description of the error>"
```

Workloads with this condition are excluded from all scheduling attempts until the

> annotation is corrected and the workload is updated.

Reviewer: Presented validation rules are not in any way based on the cluster state. From the UX perspective I would prefer to get a failure as fast as possible - ideally when we are trying to create the job-like object. Users can easily not spot the fact that workload has a condition that it will never be scheduled. Especially if they are using some system on the top of Kueue.

Is there any reason why we cannot do this validation on job-like types when they are created? Is this caused by the fact that we are using annotations?

Author: Valid concern. We can add early validation at job creation time only for built-in Kueue integrations (Job, JobSet, LWS, etc.) where we control the webhook. For external/extended integrations (custom job types, third-party operators) we have no webhook, so the Workload-level validation remains necessary as a fallback for all cases. Updated the Beta milestone accordingly.

### Scheduler integration

The spreading logic is applied inside `findTopologyAssignment` (or its equivalent

> entry point for non-TAS flavors), during the per-flavor evaluation phase of the

Reviewer 4: there is no equivalent for non-TAS, or is there?

Author: Fixed

Kueue scheduler.

#### Computing per-domain workload counts

Before evaluating a candidate workload, the scheduler computes, for each
`(namespace, label-selector, topology-key)` triple referenced by the workload's

> spreading rules, a map of `domainID → count`. The count includes all workloads in

Reviewer: This is just a count of workloads, yes? We do not care about number of pods, podsets etc, is this correct?

Author: Not exactly workloads – the unit is a PodSet group. Each PodSet group contributes exactly 1 to the count regardless of how many pods or PodSets it contains. However, a single workload can contribute more than 1 to the total if it has multiple distinct `kueue.x-k8s.io/podset-group-name` values, each placed in a different domain. So the count is of PodSet groups, not workloads.

3. Have a placement recorded for the given topology key.

Workloads that are tentatively being preempted in the current scheduling cycle are
subtracted from the count before the candidate workload is evaluated.

#### Banned and penalized domains

From the per-domain counts, two derived sets are computed for each rule:

- **Banned domains** (applies to `Required` rules): domains where
  `count(D) >= max_domain_percentage * total + 1`. No node within a banned domain
  will be considered for admission.
- **Penalized domains** (applies to `Preferred` rules): domains where
  `count(D) >= max_domain_percentage * total + 1`. Nodes within penalized domains
  receive a large scheduling score penalty.

The penalty is applied once per domain, regardless of how many pods of the
candidate workload would land there.

#### Scoring

When a domain is penalized (soft constraint violated), a configurable penalty
value is subtracted from the candidate assignment's score. The penalty is designed
to be larger than any bin-packing score difference, so that the scheduler always
prefers a non-penalized domain when one is available. When all reachable domains

> are penalized, the scheduler selects the least-penalized one, falling back to

Reviewer: "least-penalized one," this is a little bit unclear for me. Aren't all domains penalized equally? So in practice this is a choice of any domain?

Or do you mean by this that workload may be spread between many domains if needed, and due to penalization those divisions that cover the least number of domains will be preferred? If you have in mind spreading across multiple domains IMO it would be good to explicitly state this here.

Author: The penalty is a fixed value, so all penalized domains receive the same score deduction. When all domains are penalized, the choice falls back to standard bin-packing (preferring the domain with the most available capacity). Updated the text to make this explicit.

standard bin-packing tiebreaking.

Once spreading constraints are satisfied, standard bin-packing scoring applies
within the admissible set of domains, ensuring that the cluster is not fragmented

> beyond what is strictly necessary for HA goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
beyond what is strictly necessary for topology spreading goals.
```
we didn't introduce HA abbreviation in this KEP AFAIK, I know it is a popular one but probably it is better to just avoid it if we do not need it to simplify it for the future readers.

Author: Done

#### Interaction with preemption

A high-priority workload with `type: Required` rules can trigger preemptions to
achieve the required spreading. Kueue's standard priority-based preemption
applies, with the additional constraint that freed capacity must land in a
non-banned domain.

A high-priority workload with `type: Preferred` rules does not trigger
preemptions to improve spreading. The scheduler minimizes skew across available
domains through scoring, but some preemptions may still occur to find capacity
anywhere in the cluster.

#### Caching

Counting matching workloads is O(n) in the number of admitted workloads per
namespace. To avoid repeating this scan on every scheduling cycle, the scheduler
maintains a cached structure:

```
cache[(namespace, selector-key, topology-key)] → map[domainID]int
```

The cache is invalidated (and re-computed lazily) whenever:

- A workload matching the selector is admitted.
- A workload matching the selector has its admission revoked (eviction or
  preemption).

The `selector-key` is the normalized string representation of the parsed label

> selector, to allow sharing across workloads with identical selectors.

Reviewer: How will cache be recomputed upon controller restarts? Will just first scheduling loop compute it from scratch and update? Maybe it is worth to write this explicitly.

Author: Done

### Visibility

When a workload cannot be admitted because a `Required` spreading rule cannot be
satisfied (all eligible domains are banned), the following surfaces are updated:

- **Workload condition**: a `QuotaReserved: False` or `Admitted: False` condition

>   with `reason: TopologySpreadConstraintNotMet` and a message describing which

Reviewer: Will we differentiate in any way those that cannot be admitted right now - no space in appropriate topology domains vs  that will never be admitted - because for example the required topology levels do not exist in any of the flavors?

Author: If the rule's key doesn't match any topology level in the evaluated ResourceFlavor, the rule is ignored and the workload is admitted normally (regardless of Required or Preferred). The Required/Preferred distinction only applies when the key IS found. A TopologySpreadKeyNotFound condition is set in both cases to surface the misconfiguration.               
                                                                                                                                                            
The only "blocked" state is TopologySpreadConstraintNotMet – when the key is found but all eligible domains exceed maxDomainPercentage. That's a transient condition: the workload will be retried and admitted once capacity frees up.

  rule and domains are blocked.

> - **Logs**: a structured log entry at `V(3)` naming the workload, the violated

Reviewer: Will those log entries also be emitted for "preferred" constraints?

Author: Yes, addressed in the updated Visibility section. When a workload with a Preferred rule is admitted into a penalized domain, a V(4) log entry is emitted recording the workload name, PodSet, policy, and chosen domain. When a Preferred rule's key is not found on the ResourceFlavor, a TopologySpreadKeyNotFound workload condition is set instead of a log entry, since that case indicates misconfiguration rather than a runtime outcome.

  rule key, and the domain counts.

### Feature gate

The entire feature is gated behind a feature gate named `TopologySpreading`
(disabled by default in alpha). When the gate is off, the annotation is ignored
and all workloads are scheduled as if it were absent.

## Test Plan

[ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes
necessary to implement this enhancement.

### Prerequisite testing updates

- Ensure that the existing TAS integration tests cover the topology-key/label
  model that this feature relies on, to avoid regressions when the spreading
  logic interacts with TAS assignments.

### Unit tests

The following unit tests will be added or extended:

- `pkg/scheduler` (spreading rule parsing and validation): `<date>` - target ≥ 80%
- `pkg/scheduler` (banned/penalized domain computation): `<date>` - target ≥ 80%
- `pkg/scheduler` (scoring with penalized domains): `<date>` - target ≥ 80%

> - `pkg/cache` (cache invalidation on admit/evict): `<date>` - target ≥ 80%

Reviewer: Can we also have some tests for cache re-population on restart?

Author: Good suggestion. Added a unit test case: with pre-admitted workloads already in the snapshot, the first scheduling cycle after restart correctly rebuilds the per-domain count from scratch (empty cache → full scan → correct counts), and subsequent cycles use the cached value.

> - `pkg/cache` (cache invalidation on admit/evict): `<date>` - target ≥ 80%

Author: Done

4. Workloads with an invalid label selector are marked invalid.
5. Workloads targeting a topology key not present on the ResourceFlavor skip that
   flavor (Required) or ignore the rule (Preferred).
6. Label-selector matching is restricted to the same namespace.
7. Correct per-domain count computation for:
    - Multiple workloads in multiple domains.
    - Workloads with multiple pods on a single node (counted once per workload).
    - Workloads that are candidates for preemption (excluded from count).
    - Workloads that were preemption candidates but are no longer (count restored).
8. Banned domain set correctly derived for Required rules.
9. Penalized domain set correctly derived for Preferred rules.
10. Multiple rules (different keys) all applied simultaneously.
11. Cache invalidation triggered on admit and on eviction.

### Integration tests

1. End-to-end admission: a new workload is denied admission into a banned domain
   and held pending until another domain becomes available (Required rule).
2. Preemption-driven spreading: a high-priority workload triggers preemption of
   a lower-priority workload to free a less-loaded domain.

> 3. Preferred spreading: a workload is admitted into a penalized domain when no

Reviewer: Consider adding a case for -  Preferred spreading: Workloads are spread when domains are available

Author: > Consider adding a case for - Preferred spreading: Workloads are spread when domains are available

Good point. Added an integration test for the happy path: successive workloads are spread across available domains when unpenalized domains exist. The existing fallback case (admitted into a penalized domain when no unpenalized domain is available) is kept as a separate test case.

   unpenalized domain is available, and the workload condition reports the
   best-effort outcome.
4. Multiple rules at two topology levels (e.g., zone and rack).
5. Feature gate disabled: annotation is silently ignored; workloads are scheduled
   normally.
6. Integration with LWS, Deployment, plain Pods, Pod Groups: annotation is read

>    from the respective Kueue Workload object created for each integration.

Reviewer: Is it copied out of the box to the workload?

Author: Yes – the annotation is copied automatically from the Job's pod template to the Workload's PodSet template by each job integration's PodSets() method. No manual configuration is needed. I've added a note to the scheduler flow description to make this explicit.

### e2e tests

E2e tests verifying zone-level spreading on a multi-zone kind cluster
with topology-labeled nodes, covering both Required and Preferred modes.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature gate `TopologySpreading` introduced, disabled by default.
- Annotation `[alpha].kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading` documented as
  experimental.
- Support for up to two topology levels.
- `Required` and `Preferred` rule types implemented.
- `TopologySpreadInvalid` condition surfaced for misconfigured workloads.
- Unit and integration tests covering all cases listed in [Test Plan](#test-plan).
- e2e tests on a multi-zone cluster.

> - No performance regression in existing TAS scheduling benchmarks (< 5% overhead

Reviewer: How will this be confirmed? With existing performance tests or a new suite will be introduced?

Author: I think we can extend BenchmarkSchedulerTAS in pkg/scheduler/scheduler_tas_bench_test.go. Added this in KEP.

  for clusters with ≤ 1000 concurrent workloads).

#### Beta

- Feature gate enabled by default.

> - Annotation promoted to `kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading` (alpha prefix

Reviewer: "alpha prefix dropped" - IMO we shouldn't add the prefix at all, this will just require action from the users when we graduate and will not give us any advantage besides highlighting that this is alpha. IMO indicating that this is immature feature through the docs and  FG should be enough

Author: Removed.

  `TopologySpreadInvalid` condition and by the plan to graduate to a typed field
  at stable.
- The per-domain counting adds scheduler complexity and a cache invalidation
  surface. This is mitigated by the cache design and by the constraint that
  matching is namespace-scoped.
- Spreading is not enforced after admission. In dynamic environments where
  workloads frequently complete and new ones are admitted, the actual distribution
  may drift from the target. This is a deliberate trade-off to avoid continuous
  eviction storms.

## Alternatives

### Use maxSkew instead of max-domain-percentage

Kubernetes `topologySpreadConstraints` uses `maxSkew` — a maximum allowed
difference in pod counts between any two domains. This is intuitive for small
homogeneous clusters but becomes awkward when:

- Domains vary significantly in size or capacity (a skew of 1 between a 1-pod
  domain and a 100-pod domain is very different from a skew of 1 between two
  50-pod domains).
- Capacity is located in a single zone or superblock that provides many smaller
  domains (e.g., TPU cubes, GB200 racks), where fragmenting across all domains

>   is not recommended (R6-a).

Reviewer: What is R6-a?

Author: Removed.

## Proposal

The feature introduces a new namespaced CRD, `TopologySpreadingPolicy`, that
holds spreading configuration. Workloads opt into a policy by labelling their
PodSet template with the policy name. At admission time, the Kueue scheduler
resolves the label to the policy object, counts how many PodSet groups across all
workloads in the same namespace that reference this policy reside in each topology
domain, and then decides whether the candidate domain is admissible (`Required`)
or how heavily to penalize it (`Preferred`).

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Zone-level HA for inference services

A platform team runs an inference service consisting of many single-replica
Kueue workloads managed through a Deployment. Each workload is a separate GPU pod.
They want to ensure that no more than 45% of the inference pods end up in any
single availability zone.

First the platform team creates a `TopologySpreadingPolicy`:

```yaml
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: TopologySpreadingPolicy
metadata:
  name: inference-zone-spread
  namespace: team-a
spec:
  rules:
    - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
      maxDomainPercentage: 45
      type: Required
```

> 

Reviewer 5: Maybe we should pin the topology spreading policy with specific topology, 

like 
```
spec:
  topologyName: "TopologyName"
  rules:
    - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
      maxDomainPercentage: 45
      type: Required
```

that way we can verify if the levels are present if the topology even exists, and it would be simple to filter out RF, where RF topology does not connect with TopologySpreadingPolicy for podset group

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, @reruno! Pinning to a specific topologyName would indeed enable early validation at policy-creation time and simplify RF filtering in the scheduler. However, I think the current key-only approach is the right design for a few reasons:                                        

  1. Consistency with TAS – podset-required-topology and podset-preferred-topology also reference topology levels by key name rather than by a specific Topology object. Introducing topologyName here would break that pattern.                                                                                  
  2. Flexibility across ResourceFlavors – a ClusterQueue can have multiple RFs backed by different Topology objects that happen to share the same zone/rack key names. With the key-only approach, a single policy works across all of them. Pinning to a topologyName would silently exclude RFs whose topology has a different name but the same structure.                                                                                                                    
  3. Validation is still achievable – the key values can be validated against the referenced RF's topology at scheduling time (and surfaced via a workload condition), so the correctness guarantee is not lost, just deferred.

Then each workload's PodSet template is labelled with the policy name:

```yaml
template:
  metadata:
    labels:

>       kueue.x-k8s.io/topology-spreading-policy: inference-zone-spread

Reviewer 5: it will be in labels? 

I thought it will be in annotations

Author: Let's use annotation.
